Documentation for MDFB-{VERSION}.bas 

Fast/slow motion detector script with burst/review/video support and 
optional masking and test mode

Version 080914
by fudgey

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note: There are two versions of the script, for
        - cameras with no video (movie) button (A, G and IXUS/SD series)
        - cameras with with video (movie) button (s2is, s3is, s5is, tx1)

      S series and TX1 handle video mode differently from the A, G and IXUS/SD
      series cameras which is why they need their own version.
      
      Past versions of this script required separate versions for Digic II and 
      Digic III propset cameras. This is no longer the case. But,
      
      ***********************************
      A VERY RECENT CHDK IS NOW REQUIRED.
      ***********************************
      
      If your CHDK is older than September 14th 2008, it is likely not compatible
      (unless it's a recent juciphox build). This is because I used some new 
      universal script commands to get rid of those different script versions. 
      

Note: Ae lock (many cameras don't have this, it's found at least in S3IS)
      is not compatible with still photo modes of this script. Disable it
      or the script will enter an infinite loop doing nothing after
      the first detection of motion (because of how get_prop 205/206 works;
      this may be resolved in the future but it needs changes to CHDK).

Note: Your camera's shot review options may affect this script, for 
      fastest transition between end-of-shooting and re-arming of MD, 
      turn review off from the Canon menu. Review does not affect
      speed of detection or shutter lag.
      
Note: To prevent Canon firmware from shutting down the LCD and the camera, you
      must set in CHDK menu Miscellaneous -> Disable LCD Off = Script, and 
      possibly disable camera off behavior from Canon's power savings menu as 
      well.

Note: If flashlight is not disabled AND the Ae beam (auto exposure assist 
      light) is not disabled either, the Ae beam will shine constantly during 
      fast react motion detection (this happens at least on a570is and a720is).
      This is not a bug, this is exactly how the camera behaves when you do 
      this even without CHDK.

Note: This script is endless and will never end. This is not good script 
      coding practice, but checking for button presses would take precious 
      time from sitting in the motion detection routine. You can interrupt 
      the script (like any script) by full-pressing shutter. No camera settings 
      are changed (I think), especially not if you interrupt while MD is 
      waiting for motion. 

Note: md_detect_mode "PARAMETERS" argument is always 9 in fast mode. This 
      means  "make immediate shoot" and the new feature, "no shutter release 
      on shoot" are enabled. In other words, md_detect_motion presses the 
      shutter and the script releases it. This parameter does not exist on old, 
      obsolete CHDK builds. Any recent Allbest, SDM or juciphox/collaborative
      build should work.

Note: It appears that you can turn the mode dial while running this script. 
      You can start in M mode with finely tuned parameters and then try an 
      automatic mode for a while and go back to M mode without ever 
      interrupting the script. It may trigger when switching. And be careful 
      with changing to/from video mode.

Bug:  Flashlight may not be compatible with this script. It's adviceable
      not to use auto flash or flash enable modes when the camera
      is unattended, unless you don't mind the camera randomly 
      turning itself off without retracting the lense (there is no
      known danger here, just the inconvenience of losing the shot and
      having to power the camera on again). At least A570IS and S3IS are
      affected. Try if you dare.

Bug:  It has been noticed that with the camera in video mode, motion detector
      is not be able to trigger from motion on the entire LCD. Additionally, 
      in video mode the mask may not work as expected. Use the test mode to
      find out which parts of the display really are active or you may be 
      disappointed. Different video resolution/framerate modes seem to behave
      differently, for example with the A570IS the normal 30fps mode is the 
      worst, with the bottom half of the LCD inactive for triggering. This is
      very likely a problem in CHDK, not this script i.e. CHDK md_motion_detect
      seems slightly incompatible with video modes. This could be a performance
      problem of some sort, and if that's the case it likely affects different
      camera models differently.

Tip:  Avoid "AUTO" shooting mode. Use "P" instead of "AUTO".

Tip:  Remember that you can use the zoom lever/buttons to change
      values in larger steps than one when in script settings menu.

Tip:  If you get into a "MD trigger shoot loop", where the motion detector
      always shoots right after it becomes rearmed after the previous shoot
      even if doesn't seem to be any motion:
        * Verify that you have the correct version of the script for your
          camera model.
        * Increase threshold (noise on the LCD may be the cause: the default
          threshold (10) is too low for many low-light conditions).
        * If the two things above don't help, increase trigger delay.

Tip:  If you are shooting a high-contrast scene with the movement to be
      detected happening in shadows, you can improve reliability of detection
      by setting your actual desired photo exposure using CHDK overrides
      (in extra shooting options menu) and then setting the camera's own
      controls to somewhat overexpose the scene (Av, Tv, Ev adjustments,
      depending on camera mode). This is only effective in fast react MD
      mode. Note that you should override aperture, not shutter speed or ISO
      (unless aperture is already wide open, because widening the aperture
      truly increases light that hits the sensor and thus reduces noise on 
      the LCD. 

Tip:  When shooting lightnings in bright daylight, the lightning may not be
      bright enough to trigger the motion detector using the exposure settings
      that would otherwise be good for the shot. You can circumvent this by
      setting your actual desired exposure using CHDK overrides and running
      the MD script with a severely underexposed scene. The photo will use
      the overrided setting and the dark view if only used for MD. 

Tip:  To conserve batteries, you may plug an A/V cable (any plug or adapter 
      that fits the jack will do, no need to have any cables or equipment 
      connected) to your A/V jack. What will happen is that your LCD will 
      turn off, possibly saving significant amounts of battery power. Motion 
      detection still works, because the camera thinks you have an external 
      TV monitor connected and will update it's viewfinder image (which is 
      what MD uses for detection). Unplug to get your LCD image back (may 
      not be instant and you may need to interrupt the script, but there
      should be no need to reboot the camera).

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Description:
============

This is my fast motion detection script. It's ment to be as fast as currently 
possible (at least for my A570IS), but it also has a "slow shoot" mode of 
operation. Both have their pros and cons. By "fast" I mean the time from 
motion to shutter opening, a cruicial time in things such as lightning 
photography.

As a direct consequence of the speed, this script will not autofocus right 
before it shoots (unless it's in the slow shoot mode). In other words, in 
fast react mode this script does not focus to a moving object when one 
appears before the lens. This is because focusing takes a lot of time.

If not in slow shoot mode, this script will autofocus and autoexposure 
(if the camera is in automatic focus mode) when it starts and AFTER
every time it has finished shooting AND after a timeout. This means
that if an object appears in front of the camera and stays there, moving 
around for a while, the camera will probably detect motion again and you 
will get in-focus images too.

The script also has two video modes, slow and fast, very much like the
two options for still shooting. Note that the script will not put
the camera in video (movie) mode for you, you need to do that manually
before starting the script (unless you have a camera with a separate
movie button; in that case you only have a slow react video mode but
no need to set the camera to a video mode before starting the script).

Likewise, the still modes are not ment to be used in video shooting modes.


The speed that can be achieved may be different for each camera model.
There will be significant variation from shot to shot too. Also, changing
parameters will affect speed of detection; at least if you set pixel step
too low. With my A570IS I get motion-to-shutter-opening delays between 
80 ms and 150 ms, averaging at about 110 ms, but don't be surprised if
you occasionally get a significantly slower response. There is an optimization
modification pending for CHDK, I currently run a development build which 
gives me a reliable delay between about 80 ms and 110 ms, with median
below 90 ms. 

This script will not change camera shooting parameters. You need to
set the camera into the shooting modes you want the script to operate
with. The camera will take images just as it would if it was you
who is keeping the shutter depressed:

  - If in normal single shooting drive mode, a single photo will be 
  taken after each time motion is detected. If you set burst/review time
  to >0 seconds, the shot will be reviewed on the LCD for the set time
  before motion detection will be armed again.
  
  - If in continous shooting drive mode, a burst of images will be taken.
  The shooting time is set by burst/review time in seconds, it must
  be greater than 0 for more than 1 shot to be taken. No extended 
  review of the last shot available. The number of shots is determined
  by your camera's shooting speed and depends on things such as 
  camera model, shutter speed, ISO value, RAW mode, memory card speed,
  noise reduction setting etc. This is why even a 3 second burst may
  sometimes give you no more than one photo.
  
    Tip:  For the highest possible burst rate (photos per second), 
      * Disable RAW.
      * Use a fast shutter speed (Tv).
      * Do not use ISO 200 or higher (camera will spend time applying 
        some noise reduction filtering).
      * Use a sufficiently fast SD card and keep it defragmented by
        full erase as often as you find convenient.
      * Enable the digital telephoto feature and choose the one and only
        JPEG image size for which the camera doesn't need to resize
        the photo (for a570is 1,9x digital telephoto this means 1600x1200).
        At least on the a570is the digital telephoto feature is marked
        with a "T" symbol on the LCD, and the optimum JPEG resolution
        can be found by decreasing JPEG resolution setting until the "T" symbol
        is no longer blue. Note that reducing JPEG resolution further (or
        without the digital telephoto feature) will slow down the burst 
        because the camera will have to resize the image (unless your SD card
        is very slow). Your camera may not have this feature.
  
  - If in custom timer mode, images will be taken after the delay
  you have set in the camera and the AF light will blink, then 1 to 10
  shots will be taken depending on how many you've selected (your
  camera model may have a different set of parameters), and the AF
  light will blink between the shots. Note that the repetition rate is 
  slower than in continous drive mode.

The script lets the camera autoexposure and autofocus unless you prevent
it. This means you can use shooting modes other than M with this script
Be aware that in fast mode, exposure and focus are set first when the script
starts and after that only after the script shoots or timeouts. Timeout is 
by default set to 5 minutes (300 seconds) so even fairly rapid changes in
sunlight will be adjusted to properly.

If you shoot fast objects, make sure focus isn't a problem (for
example by using manual focus to the distance your objects are moving
at by average and/or by shooting from a distance) and that shutter speed
is short enough. 

If you shoot objects that move slowly, you can use the slow shoot option
to solve the focus problem.

This script is ment to shoot quickly after something moves on the LCD. 
If you also want the script to be detecting motion again as soon as possible
after taking a shot, you should:
  - use manual exposure (camera in M mode), must be set before running the 
    script
  - use manual focus, must be set before running the script
  - set trigger delay to the minimum allowable in your camera in your
    shooting conditions (possibly 0)
  - set burst/review time = 0 unless you want several images in
    continous shooting drive mode
  - disable shot review from Canon's menus
  - disable noise reduction in CHDK RAW menu (if using long exposures)
  - disable RAW saving
  - use a fast, defragmented memory card

Also, it may not be a good idea to enable histogram and zebra in a way
that makes them be displayed during motion detect.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Parameters:
===========

Channel: 

Selects the color space component to monitor for motion detection.
U, Y and V are the YUV space color components. Default is to use luminance 
Y (brightness). Alternatively red, green or blue channels of RGB color 
space can be used.


Columns, Rows: 

Motion detect works by averaging the color space parameter
selected in the "Channel" parameter on the screen. The screen is divided
in to N=columns*rows cells, and average is calculated for each
cell. Smaller cells may make detection more sensitive to smaller object
and smaller movements. The cells are drawn on the LCD when MD
is running. Also study the Pixel Step and threshold parameters.


Pixel Step: 

An average is calculated from the contents of each cell. 
This pixel step parameter makes this a bit more complicated, because
if it is >1, it makes the motion detector skip pixels and only 
use every Nth pixel vertically and horizontally (N is the value you give,
default is every 6th pixel, top left corner of the LCD is the first
active pixel).

Setting this parameter 1 is not recommended, because calculating all
pixels will take a lot of time from the camera and you might end up using
more time than the 10 ms CHDK interval. Odd things might happen. If you
must use a low pixel step value, be instructed that you may need to increase
trigger delay (explained later). 

On the other hand, setting this parameter too big will make detection of 
small objects a matter of luck as they may or may not move around the pixels 
that are being monitored. Note that if your pixel step is high, there
may be cells (especially if you have lots of cells) which don't have any
active pixels!


Threshold: 

The lower the threshold, the smaller a change in a cell will trigger
motion detection. In low light, higher threshold is required
or noise will cause spurious triggering. Along with decrease in the 
number of cells, increasing threshold will make motion detection less 
trigger-happy if you have problems with e.g. trees moving in the wind
causing unwanted pictures to be taken. Changing compare interval
will also affect triggering.


Compare interval (milliseconds): 

Motion detect takes one sample from the display, then waits a time specified
by the "compare interval" parameter before taking another sample and then
compares these two. The default is very fast to optimize speed of detection
when shooting fast things, e.g. lightnings, but it's not suitable for things
that move slowly.

If interval is short, objects that move slowly will not trigger motion 
detection no matter how big the object is. Similarly, gradual changes in the
amount of sunlight will not cause a trigger if compare interval is short 
enough.

Note that while you can specify an interval as low as 1 ms, only multiplies 
of 10 ms will actually have any effect as this is the finest time step 
available for motion detection (it comes from the camera's keyboard polling 
interval). And even further, 30 ms may be the shortest you can go if/when 
the LCD update period is 30 ms.

So, with intervals shorter 10 ms, the motion detector is probably comparing
identical pictures two times out of three but it is also working at maximum
available speed of detection because an LCD update will be noticed during
the first CHDK period after the update.


Trigger delay: 

How long to wait for camera to stabilize before starting to detect motion. 
A low value means the camera will be detecting motion again promptly after
taking a picture (unless you have things like RAW saving or shot review
enabled). A large value means that after your shooting (and picture
review) the motion detector will be started and the motion detector grid
will be drawn, but it will not react to any movement until trigger delay
has passed. This may be useful for making sure you don't get too many images
of a bird landing in front of the camera if you only want photos of flying
birds, not of ones jumping around.

In the past a long trigger delay was needed to prevent motion detector 
scripts from entering eternal shooting loops, where the camera's post-shooting
actions (such as adjusting LCD contrast) caused motion detect to trigger 
instantly. Increasing trigger delay helped, but the problem was that a lot of
things affected the length of the required delay (slow shutter speeds, ISO 
values, noise reduction setting, memory card speed, RAW saving, low light
to name a few).

This has mostly been fixed with a few get_prop 206 (or 205) commands and the
default trigger delay is 0.5 s. If you experience loops anyway, try 
increasing trigger delay (but more importantly, try increasing threshold 
first).


Burst/Review/Video time: 

If 0, take single shots. If >0, how many seconds to keep shutter depressed. 
If continuous shooting mode is enabled ("burst mode"), the camera will shoot
using this mode, if it is not enabled, the camera will show the shot review
for the specified time on LCD (unless your camera doesn't work this way or
is configured in a way that disables this review feature; review by holding
the shutter is a standard feature of your camera when it's in single shot
drive mode).

The script does not switch to continuous shooting mode, the user must do this
before running the script from the camera's own menus.

In video mode, this is the approximate duration of the video. Note that this
is not an accurate value, it may typically be off by a second or two.


Timeout:

This is the timeout value for the motion detector. Most of the time this 
script sits in the motion detection function waiting for motion. It exits
this function only if motion is detected or enough time passes (timeout). 
This timeout is specified in tens of seconds.

Default is 30 = 300 seconds = 5 minutes.

The longer the timeout, the more of the script's time will be spent in
detecting motion. However, if you are not running in the "Slow Shoot" mode,
and you have autoexposure or autofocus enabled, you may want to let the
camera do those things every now and then. The default of 5 minutes should
be short enough to adapt to changes in sunlight but long enough for almost
perfect coverage in time spent detecting motion (if autoexposure + focus
takes 3 seconds, this is 99 % coverage).


Shoot fast/slow/test:

When Fast shoot (0) is selected, this script acts as a fast react motion
detector as described above. This means it first half presses the shutter
(causing autoexposure and autofocus if those are currently enabled in your
camera) and fully presses the shutter when it detects motion. This way the
picture is taken very fast after motion is detected, but the problem is 
that many objects may end up out of focus.

If you enable slow shoot, the script will go into motion detection without
pressing the shutter. When motion is detected, the shutter is pressed and
thus exposure and focus are set and only when that's done with, a picture 
is taken. This way the object will likely be in focus, but if it moves fast
it may be long gone by the time the camera shoots.

In test mode no photos will be taken. Instead, the script just draws the MD 
grid and prints information about each detection which would have caused a 
photo to be taken. This is good for fine tuning masks, camera orientation, 
threshold and other settings without the need to delete any test images.


Masking: 

Using the four Mask/Use Columns/Rows Left/Right/Top/Bottom parameters you 
can select any rectangular area on your LCD using your MD cell grid as the 
resolution of this rectangle. You can then set the motion detector to 
ignore everything inside that rectangular mask (Masking=1, Mask) or to use 
only the cells in your mask for motion detection (Masking=2, Use). To 
disable masking entirely, set Masking=0 (No). 

The green motion detection grid is always up to date with the  masking 
settings, so it's easy to see if you are getting the mask you wanted.
Try test mode to verify the operation. Especially in video mode this
is essential, because there's something wrong with it.

(btw, this masking part was shamelessly copied directly from Barney Fife's 
'MD LightningB3' script).

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Thanks go to MX3 for md_detect_motion, Barney Fife for masking
code among other things, Anonymous for solving trigger delay loop
problems and all the other lovely CHDK developers.

Obviously, a standard disclaimer applies i.e. while I believe this script
to be as safe as any part of CHDK, there is no warranty and if this
breaks your camera or your marriage it is of your own responsibility
entirely. In that case you may feel better if you blame the cat.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

TODO:
- add option for number of continuous drive mode shoots to take using
  the new command for this (get_exp_count?). Use get_drive_mode to 
  avoid getting stuck if we're not in continous drive mode.

- possibly make an option for not filling the card using the new disk space 
  functions? Or maybe an "exit after N*10 photos"? Would be a good safety 
  option when leaving the camera alone and fearing it may start triggering 
  too often. Maybe even shut down camera at exit.

- add test and warning about ae lock

- Disable Ae beam during fast MD if flashlight is not disabled.
  
- Improve CHDK's md_detect_motion command by adding an option which draws
  red dots over each active MD pixel. This would help users to better 
  understand how large an object needs to be to reliably trigger the MD.

- Maybe add an optional focus range option to the slow shoot modes, see
  http://chdk.setepontos.com/index.php/topic,1526.0.html
  
---

Changelog:

MSDB 080914:
- Now requires the new CHDK juciphox-allbest-trunk version, 
  build 509 or higher (if your CHDK is older than September 14th 2008,
  it is likely not compatible). 
- No more separate versions for the two propsets (Digic II/III) thanks
  to the new universal commands replacing get_prop commands. Models with
  a separate video button still have their own version. Each version
  now outputs an error if you try the wrong one.
- For models with no video button, video/still mode is now autodetected
  from mode dial position and thus the still photo/video parameter has been
  removed.
- Added commands to release shoot_half after taking a photo. This fixes
  operation on IXUS750 and IXUS55, likely some others as well. On most
  cameras releasing shoot_full was sufficient, but apparently not for all.
  This change shouldn't break anything and it doesn't slow the script down
  (it adds 10 ms to post-still-shoot operation (not reaction time), but the
  propcase wait loop is probably equally shorter now, so re-arm is probably
  just as fast as it was before).

MDFB 080716:
- Added test mode (Shoot fast=0,slow=1,test=2). In this mode no pictures
  will be taken, but the motion detector grid will be drawn and results
  of each detection are printed on the console. It's good for tweaking
  masks, thresholds etc. without having to worry about deleting all
  the test images.
- Added test and warning message about flashlight usage to script start.
- Fixed autoexposure on timeout for both fast md loops.
- Documentation improvements (more tips, camera model list etc).

MDFB 080419: 
- Added video modes. To use them, select Video=1 AND put camera in 
  video mode (in future video mode will be autodetected).
  Video mode should work for all cameras. There are TWO video
  modes, just like the still modes: fast and slow. The fast one sits
  detecting motion with half_shoot pressed and slow one doesn't
  press the shutter until it detects motion. Thus, the fast one
  autofocuses at script start/timeout/re-arm (and exposure likely gets
  treated similarly, but the camera adjusts it during record so it's
  not a big issue). Note that video length argument is not accurate to
  the second.
- Small fix in slow mode burst timing
- Note: Fast react video mode has an "unnecessary delay". It's there
  because property 205/206 doesn't get set in video mode and is thus
  useless to optimize trigger delay. If the user uses still and video
  modes, he probably wants to use minimal trigger delay and that just
  won't work for video. The fixed delay is there to make the problem
  go away for most occasions. Alternatively one could add a separate
  trigger delay option for fast react video.
- DOC: added warnings about Ae lock and flash.
- DOC: added note about shot review options
- DOC: added note about using the zoom lever/buttons in script settings.

MDFB 080411:
  - initial test release
